Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Paul Petit. He's professor
of Paleolithic archaeology at Durham University. He specializes in
Paleolithic art and in the long-term development of the
treatment. Of the dead and today we're going to
talk about paleoanthropology, evolutionary thanatology, mortuary practices, and Paleolithic
cave art. So Doctor Petit, welcome to the show.
It's a pleasure to everyone.
Hello Ricardo, thank you very much. Pleasure to be
on the dissenter.
Great. So, uh, uh, you know, it's funny because
I've already had many paleoanthropologists on the show, but
it's actually the first time I'm going to ask
this question. So, how did paleoanthropology actually start? I
mean, tell us a little bit about the history
of paleoanthropology and What does it study exactly? Uh,
uh, I mean within the field, the broader field
of anthropology, what does it, uh, study? Hm.
Well, paleoanthropology is a relatively new discipline actually. It
really only arose in the latter half of the
19th century. Uh, AS science progressed to the notion
that the world was very old, its life forms
have evolved on it rather than appearing suddenly, and
that humans indeed had evolved themselves. So paleoanthropology. As
the name old humans suggests, uh, is the study
of the evolution er of the human family in
all its forms, genetic, biological, anatomical, behavioral and cognitive.
So Paleolithic archaeology, the archaeology of the old stone
age over which humans evolved, is the study in
particular of how those human brains were being used
in terms of behavior. And really until the middle
of the 19th century, um, most societies, uh, had
this notion that the earth was relatively young, uh,
that of course creation in the biblical or other
senses was really what explained the appearance of animals
and so on, and of course the work of
Alfred Russell Wallace and Charles Darwin. In the middle
decades of that century, uh, were instrumental in demonstrating
that most likely the, the, the, um, life on
Earth as we know it evolved very, very gradually
over the course of a very old world as
the likes of Charles Lyell, the geologist, have been
able to demonstrate. So really, uh, by the 1850s.
Charles Darwin and colleagues were predicting that hidden in
the nooks and crannies of the world, it's caves
and rock shelters and river valleys should be found
fossils of humans who are in an evolutionary state
more primitive to those of us living today. So
the prediction was there and it was actually, From
the 1850s that human fossils, as we would now
call them, uh, first started emerging, uh, of what
we now know to be Neanderthals, a little later,
of early members of our own species, Cro-Magnon as
they were called at the time, and so on.
So really, we only have 1.5 centuries over which
paleoanthropology. Was developed and for the first half of
that it was really excavations and very, very simple
attempts to hang discoveries together in time, with very
little notion about what absolute ages we're dealing with.
So it's only really when we came through, Into
the 20th century, uh, when the old doubts about
how old the earth could be were really put
to rest, finally, and people began to accept the
fact that we're dealing with millions of years, not
a handful of thousands, did the professional discipline. Of
paleoanthropology appear and really the way we go about
it now, the way we formulate hypotheses, the scientific
techniques available to us, the excavation methods and so
on, um, belong to the last century only, from
about the last, um, 60 years or so, from
about the 1960s.
So was it around that time that people started
uh referring to a distinct field of paleoanthropology, uh
uh I mean around the 1960s or was it
a bit earlier?
Yeah, around the 1960s, of course anthropology in its
broader sense had been around a lot longer and
itself had come about as a professional discipline by
the early 20th century when of course Westerners were
traveling the world, encountering a lot of um people
in very different states of organization and so on.
Uh, SO if you like, the background for the
understanding of how diverse human societies can be, how
widespread, and so on, had been in place since
the start of the 20th century. And it's really
only in the middle part of that 20th century
that if you like, the chronological element was added
to the to the global anthropology, the understanding that
it's not just about space, not just about the
fact that there's humans everywhere on Earth and they
look very different, but that they have been dispersing
across the Earth over millions of years.
Mhm. So, uh, since we're going to talk about
how humans treat the dead, I mean we're going
to focus on humans, but we're also going to
talk a little bit about other primates. Uh, I
would like to start by asking you, what is
evolution? ARY thanatology and is this uh is this
uh I mean I, I'm not sure if you
would call it a distinct field or not but
uh how long, how old is this idea of
uh studying thanatology.
Well, as a specific focus on how humans and
other animals respond to death, interact with corpses, deal
with the processes of death, evolutionary thanatology is a
very new discipline. It's a decade old or thereabouts.
I say this because the very term has been
coined by. A disparate group of us, archaeologists such
as myself, zoologists, primatologists among them, and so on,
in an attempt to unify our hitherto disparate attempts
to understand what our subjects are, are doing about
the dead. So of course archaeologists. Have been very
interested in death, dying, and treatment of the dead
since the birth of archaeology again in the, in
the 19th century. Of course, everything we deal with
as as as as archaeologists has been produced by
now dead humans. So inevitably the funerary archaeological record
is a critical subject of our study and equally,
um, some zoologists have focused on what happens around
dead animals, be they whales, dolphins, chimpanzees or whatever.
But actually in the zoological world that focus on
death and dying is relatively new. It's understandable that
zoologists, primatologists among them, are primarily interested in the
living animal and how the animal adapts to its
environment. It's conspecifics and so on. So it's only
recently er that they have turned their attentions to
death and what that precipitates in er in these
social groups. So evolutionary thanatology, thanatology of course being
the study of death and dying and so on.
Evolutionary thanatology has come about as a collaborative effort
for us all to try to start thinking in
similar ways, uh, to develop hypotheses, to develop methodologies
whereby we might really understand. All of those frankly
weird ways us humans deal with the dead have
come about in very long term evolutionary perspective. It's
very difficult to do. There's a lot of problems
with it, of course, uh, but equally it's absolutely
fascinating.
So when it comes to the study of human
treatment of the dead, uh, I mean, what do
you study, you yourself, yourself specifically, what do you,
what are the topics that interest you the most
when it comes to that, uh, area?
Well, when we think of death, us archaeologists tend
to think of burial in cemeteries or big tombs
er for rulers and this kind of thing. I'm
more interested in the earlier emergence of these kind
of activities. So as a Paleolithic archaeologist and one
specializing, say on the last 100,000 years of the
Pleistocene of the Ice Age, my interest is with
Neanderthals and early members of Homo sapiens. In an
archaeological sense, we would say, uh, the Middle Paleolithic
for Neanderthals, the Upper Paleolithic for Homo sapiens, and
the Middle Stone Age, late Stone Age in Africa,
same, same kind of thing. So it's this period
over which I think we can see a number
of indications as to how humans evolved in their
treatment of the dead from something more akin to
what we see with chimpanzees today. Uh, TO what
we recognize in modern human societies, burying, commemoration of
the dead, grief, mourning, and this kind of thing.
So it's that very long term evolution that I'm
particularly interested in and why these things came about
and what they say about the brains of those
early humans, er, and the societies that they'd organized
themselves into.
So you mentioned Neanderthals and Homo sapiens there, but
uh do we know exactly how old mortuary practices
are in human evolution? I mean, were there any
earlier species in the homo genus that we have
any evidence they might have practiced, they might have
they might have had these kinds of practices?
Yeah, and as archaeologists we are fixated on burials,
you know, that's one of the things I'm keen
to get away from, that digging a shallow grave
and putting a corpse in it and covering it
up again is not the be all and end
all, you know, it's not the evolutionary crowning achievement
of, of funerary behavior, so. Prior to that, we
do have a few indications spanning a few million
years, um, of human evolution. It's obviously very difficult
to obtain any comprehensive evidence of this kind of
behavior. With paleoanthropology, we're always just sampling the tip
of the iceberg in terms of what we assume
has gone on in the past, so, The we
we're often discovering new human species. We've only known
the little um dwarf species Homo naledi in South
Africa for, you know, a decade. We've only known
a similarly small species in the Philippines, Homo luzonensis,
for a similar period of time. Who knows what's
out there that will turn up tomorrow or in
10 years' time or whatever. So of course we're
always dealing with a very small amount of data.
But these data show that prior to the first
emergence of deliberate burials, let's say about around 100,000
years ago with some Neanderthals, some Homo sapiens, we
can see that there are some sites in the
landscape. Shafts um dropping down into the darkness, caves
and fissures, those little envelopes in the, in the
well where things can be tucked away, were being
used to dispose of the dead. So we can
see, for example, around 400,000 years ago in the
Sima de los Husos, the pit of the bones
uh in at Atapuerca in Spain, that a number
of humans that we would call Homo Heidelbergensis, effectively
an early. Form of Neanderthals around this time were
being deposited around the edge of this mysterious shaft,
uh, and they slowly slumped into it. So this
is kind of dragging corpses and leaving them, abandoning
them at specific places in the landscape. We might
see that behavior further back at um the site
of um AL 333 um in Ethiopia in the
Afar Depression. We have an accumulation of at least
9 Australopithecines, so we're now back around before 3
million years ago, and at least 9 dead Australopithecines
have been dragged into tall grasses away from the
water hole, away from the area of the landscape.
Uh, THAT activity was particularly busy in and tucked
away in this. Now I call these processes funerary
caching, where bodies have just been tucked away in
a landscape that's not been modified, no graves have
been dug, no construction has been made. I think
this is what has a very long antiquity, but
we can count on one hand. The number of
sites we have for this over 2 or 3
million years. Prior to that, of course, we have
no direct archaeological evidence of this. Then we need
to look at modern parallels, so perhaps for our
earliest ape ancestors back in the Miocene, looking at
how modern primates, modern apes respond to the death
will give us some vague. Understanding of what we
might expect to have been going on back then,
uh, but of course we'll never get any tangible
evidence. If all people are doing is things face
to face, you know, calls, dragging corpses and so
on until they're finally abandoned, this is not going
to leave an archaeological trace. So we just have
to use logical inference for this.
Yes, uh, do we know what are, what are
the most common mortuary practices across human societies? I
mean, what are, what are the most common things,
I, I don't know, rituals and so on that
people tend to have when it comes to dealing
with the death.
I think there's two ways to answer that. I
think the most universal human characteristic of dealing with
the dead is that we have introduced a spatial
element to it, or to put it another way,
we've incorporated the landscape in the sense of separating
out parts of the landscape which we've come to
associate with the dead. So on the one hand,
er, we can collect together the dead in those
points of the landscape. So if we have enough
burials in an area where people aren't necessarily living,
it's not an area for the living, it's purely
for the dead. We might call these cemeteries or
we might build large structures for them, particularly if
they're of social importance, call these tombs, necropolises and
so on. So this collecting together of the dead
at specific places in the landscape is one extreme
of two ways of dealing with these. The second,
of course, is to fragment, uh, the bodies of
the dead up. They can be left exposed to
the elements, to be eaten by vultures or slowly
decay, and then at some point their bones are
collected up and deposited. In a grave, a tomb,
er, you know, any kind of area like this,
you know, really, sometimes those remains can be processed,
so instead of allowing the body to decay, They
can be cut up, dismembered, defleshed, and so on,
uh, and indeed can be part consumed as well,
so fragmentation and. Sometimes cannibalism er is the other
extreme of this process, so from collectiveness to fragmentation
as well. So really in the broadest sense, these
are the things that humans have taken over the
course of their long-term evolution which distinguish them as
far as we can see anyway, er from their
from their ape ancestors and from all other animals.
Uh, BUT are mortuary practices, uh, human universal? I
mean, among all the societies that we've been able
to study, are mortuary practices present, uh, everywhere?
To a degree, yes, um, we can see, so
that I at least reserve the term mortuary practice
to refer in the most broadest sense to anything.
Involving responses to and interactions with a dead body,
a corpse, um, so, in that broadest sense, we
can see that ants and termites and other insects
indulge in mortuary activities because they will remove a
dead body from their nests, or they'll cover it
up with sediment, one way or another, they will,
um, Isolate that corpse er from the living conspecifics.
Now of course, none of us will be thinking
that those ants and termites are busy thinking about
the implications of the dead and even grieving over
them and so on. It is of course a
purely chemical reaction er to not wanting to keep
something decaying. Uh, Around the world of the living
and so on, so it's a homeostatic, um, reaction,
you know, they're, they're just as a chemical indicator
to keep, um, to keep the group healthy. That
forms a very, very good basis er for what
comes er thereafter. So in that very broadest of
sense, we find mortuary behavior present among all mammal
all mammalian groups and even insect groups er and
this kind of thing as we would expect. But
in the more sophisticated sense that you or I
would associate with this, we can start seeing more
interesting things happening among various mammals, among birds for
that matter, er and mammals, whether in the sea,
such as whales and dolphins or on land, um,
er such as monkeys er as well as apes
er too. Now what they seem to show. Uh,
IS social responses, er, to death, and it's no
surprise that mammals in particular can maintain, build and
maintain, uh, quite complex social groups, and if one
member of that group has suddenly been removed by
death, obviously there's a lot of social negotiation. Association,
expression of emotions and this sort of thing, uh,
that occurs and, and that's what we, we think
we can see, first of all, the expression of
confusion, why is this individual no longer moving, no
longer responsive to my calls or whatever, um, what's
happening, can I try to understand it? Is there.
A danger, um, what do we need to do,
uh, as a group, and, uh, many of the
activities we see occurring at the point a death
has occurred or shortly thereafter relate to that, you
know, working things out, what's going on, you know,
let's, uh, let's ensure that, um, this isn't gonna
happen to the rest of us and so on.
And that we might say is a typical mammalian
characteristic, well, an avian mammalian uh characteristic. After that,
uh, we can see the injection of some emotions
into this. If social organization has increased to the
point of people, um, developing emotional attachments to other
individuals, then obviously what you and I would regard
today as grief. Um, AND mourning, er, begins, er,
to emerge as well, and perhaps we can see
that among primates, particularly, er, among apes, er, as
well. So if you like, we're starting now at
this stage, higher mammals if you like, to see
something that's looking a bit more humanlike, if you
like, sadness. Uh, Emotion, mourning, uh, and so on,
but the real difference, the real thing that distinguishes
human mortuary activity from, as far as we can
tell, any other, um, animal, uh, mortuary activity is
the fact that we question the notion. That when
an individual's body is no longer moving, then that
individual has ceased to exist. So really our final
universal among all humans now is that most have
or have had a belief that something else survives
of us after death, er and therefore goes somewhere
else after death to continue in existence, that really
is. In my opinion, the most fascinating aspect of
the archaeological study er of funerary behavior, all the
weird and wonderful beliefs we have to deny the
fact that we are annihilated and simply cease to
exist anymore after death.
Uh, SO as far as we know it across
all human societies, there's some form of a belief
in the afterlife or life after death, is that
it?
Absolutely, of course, it's a relatively modern post-Enlightenment idea
that there isn't anything, those. Of us who believe
that that, you know, there is no creation, no
spiritual world, etc. AND we do simply, um, disappear
uh at death, but as a more broader characteristic,
setting aside modern Western intellectual society or whatever, then
most uh most human societies can be characterized in
several ways. First, they all believe that death is
inevitable. You know, nobody escapes it, you know, there's
no, you know, special pleading or anything like that,
um, it occurs to everyone and it involves the
cessation of biological function, you stop breathing, your blood
stops pumping oxygen around your body, etc. ETC. AND
also that it is irreversible, you can't come back,
at least. Not in this former anyway, but finally,
er to overcome that, and this may be due
to our cognitive evolution. Uh, WE have this notion
that we are not just a sack of bones
and fluids, uh, but that there is something else,
the me and the you in here, uh, which
in some way or another can exist independently of
this sack of fluids and bones and so on
and so forth. In other words, our very theory
of mind, our cognitive ability to think that there
is a me in here. And that there is
a you in you and er and so on,
yet leads us to this belief that well, this
can't be it, you know, me can't just be
this sack of fluid and bone, er you know
there's something else and maybe that flies off er
and so on, and this is what is, you
know, really universal, er about human beliefs, and we
can characterize them a little further, even that um
not only do people, Across the world and over
time have their own beliefs in the ways that
they deny this final annihilation, er but they all
typically have the notion that, um there is a
journey that the soul, the mind, the me, whatever.
Um, GOES on in order to reach its final
destination, up there, down there, or wherever, uh, it
is, you know, and that's fraught, um, with danger,
the journey to the afterlife, and that, that typically
corresponds to the period over which the corpse is
decaying, so obviously an unpleasant process. So that's almost
mirrored. In the spiritual realm by the trials and
tribulations, say of an ancient Egyptian soul, on its
way to the afterlife and the, and the, the
troubles it has, the tests it faces and this
sort of thing.
Uh, DO all human societies, uh, treat death in
a negative way? That is, for example, if someone
dies, do all people everywhere tend to, uh, go
through grief and express sadness, or, uh, uh, is
there. Any variation, I mean, could there be any
societies out there where people are actually have a
positive reaction to death or
or not? The beautiful characteristics of all of our
human beliefs in death and afterlives is that they
beautifully combine the two. It's inevitable that death is
going to be sad. Um, YOU know, for any
individuals who have maintained close relationships, certainly husbands, wives,
brothers, sisters, mothers, fathers, children, etc. OBVIOUSLY there is
always going to be predominantly an aspect of sadness.
But what all of our religious systems do, our
belief systems, is give us a way not to
eliminate that sadness, but to mitigate it, to soften
it, er, if you like. So it's quite interesting
that when most people across the world talk about
death, They don't talk about it in such harsh
terms, you know, my mum has just died, you
know, they typically talk about it as if the
person has just gone out of the room to
make a cup of tea in the kitchen. You
know, they, they've passed on, they've moved on, and
so on, so. These belief systems allow us to
maintain the notion that sure, they've gone for now,
they've just gone on a long holiday, but we
will be reunited up there, down there, wherever er
wherever it is, so that's why a lot of
our belief systems, er instill this feeling, if not
of joy, but of happiness that well it's inevitable,
They're at rest, they can enjoy their reward up
there in the clouds or, you know, wherever it
is, um, and although we're obviously sad that they're
no longer around for the rest of our lives,
we know we're going on, uh, to meet them
there, to be reunited and so on. So it
is a beautiful combination of two extremes really, sadness,
grief, and hope on the other hand.
Yeah, I, I would like to ask you specifically
about funerals. I mean, do we know when funerals
first appeared and what kinds of social roles, uh,
do funerals, uh, serve?
Well, I think Speaking primatologically, we can see now
examples of how chimpanzees respond to a sudden death,
and by sudden I mean say a chimpanzee has
fallen out of a tree and died or has
been ambushed by a leopard and died, and we
can see that there's a lot of social activity.
Um, THERE'S a lot of confusion, there's a lot
of prodding the dead body. What's happened, lifting its
arm and letting it drop, looking in its eyes,
you know, basically what I would call morbidity, an
interest in why this body has stopped moving and
talking and so on. So, uh, we also see,
if you like, um, a reenactment of all the
social activities chimpanzees do as well. It's making them
in their confusion. Um, IT'S an alarm making them
renegotiate their activities, um, here, so we see a
lot of, um, social, um, displaying, adult males walking
up and down, you know, doing this, calling, odd
calls, expressing their disquiet and so on, and this
can actually go on for some time. And we
can see at some moments almost an aggression, a
hitting of corpses too, wake up, get up. This,
this is enough. You've done this enough now, it's
no longer funny, you know, and on the other
hand, the grief, the sadness, the sitting still contemplation
as us humans would call it. And it's interesting
to me, and this is the reason why I
begin by discussing primates here, chimpanzees, because these are
all the aspects that one day we will see
and call wakes and mourning behaviors in the modern
world. So certainly speaking say from the modern West,
once we have observed a period in which the
body is being prepared for burial or cremation. Uh,
THE, the solemnities are then observed, er, the body
disposed of, so to speak, but after that we
have this wake or celebration of the, the life
of this individual. And that's what really serves in
a very human way er to er to try
to put the best message on it. They've just
moved on, let's celebrate them, you know, we'll have
a lot of alcohol and tell good stories and
all this sort of thing, and these are all
obvious characteristics er of, you know, starting. The process
er of overcoming the sad loss of these individuals,
reinforcing the beliefs of what is to come, that
their their soul is gonna be OK, we'll see
them again and so on and so forth, and
then begins to a final human characteristic which is
commemoration. So commemoration can be anything er from a
gravestone saying here lies Paul Pettit, archaeologist, you know,
blah blah blah um to to stories, um memorial
services, you know, stories about funny episodes in their
lives and most importantly visiting the site of their
disposal, their tomb, their grave, where their ashes are
or the scattering of their ashes. But importantly, this
is the point at which space certain parts of
the landscape become important and almost that person becomes
associated with them. Whether it's a cemetery you go
to tap the grave, tend it, leave some flowers.
Excuse me, or whether it's the forest or sea
over which you scattered their ashes and so on,
and that's a very important thing because the dead
are dead friends and relatives don't just exist up
here, but we have a visible reference in the
landscape to really strongly remind us of them.
There are also people who leave food right like
the Japanese do. I, I, I think that some
of them leave the food, the, the diseased person's
favorite food or something like that.
Yeah, dining with the dead is a very characteristic
phenomenon in many human societies, past and present, uh,
in other words, those times of the year. When
the dead are felt to be closer, All Hallows's
Eve or Halloween, being an obvious Western one, where,
you know, the obvious thing to do is to
go to sit with them, feed them, uh, and
so on, and you know, feeding the dead, maintaining
them in their graves and tombs again is a
very. Universal characteristic and this brings up actually a
fascinating aspect I think of any belief system, be
it with the dead or or with the spiritual
world, is the the oddly contradictory elements uh of
these that don't seem to bother us. So for
example, Say with the ancient Romans, we might have
a tomb saying, you know, oh traveler, passing by
my tomb, why don't you stop here just for
a while and remember me. Paulus Pettitus, you know,
I've died now, I'm lying, you know, sleeping in
this grave, but remember, pour some wine and olive
oil, you know, down onto my grave so I
can eat and drink, um, you know, remember I
was once flesh and so on, but here I
am, I'm bones lying in a grave, everybody knows
that, but I'm telling you or my. Funerary stone
is telling you, well no actually I'll I'd appreciate
a glass of wine please, you know, we don't
ever have a problem with that, we don't ever
have a problem thinking the dead might be watching
over our, our shoulders, uh, you know, and this
kind of thing, our logical brain tells us, well,
that's ridiculous, but actually our emotional brain and our
theory of mind, The way our brain creates all
these things in our imaginations overrides that because it
feels good, you know, it, it feels good to
think, yeah, alright, you know, somebody might be providing
me with a glass of wine when I'm lying
in my grave one day. Or or this kind
of thing, or I'll be able to look over
my descendants' shoulders and tell them not to do
things and this sort of thing, you know.
Yeah, uh, so earlier you've talked about some, uh,
practices that we can see across other primates and
even mammals more generally. Um, DO you think that
at this point there's good enough evidence for us
to be able to tell whether. Other primates and
even possibly other mammals are aware of death, and
of course, uh, I mean, uh, I guess that
we have to be a bit careful here with
how we approach the question because sometimes we see
those, uh, very fascinating videos on the internet where,
for example, chimpanzees are, uh, interacting with, um, With
the corpse, with the, with the dead body of
one of their conspecifics in specific ways and we
have to be careful both when it comes to
an anthropomorphizing them, but also, I mean, I guess
that when there's good enough evidence for us to
Uh, perhaps say that, uh, there's the poss at
least the possibility that other animals are aware of
that we should also perhaps not be too insisting
on, uh, uh, I mean, being attached to the
idea that there's, this is a uniquely human or
exclusively human, uh, experience, so, uh, uh, what do
you think about that?
Yeah, so certainly you know in the broadest theoretical
realm, I'm fascinated by this. I'm, I'm a gradualist,
I love the idea of you, you being a
very long-term gradual emergence of all the stuff that
we see culminating in humans, if you like, over
the animal world, but it's obviously remarkably difficult to
get inside the minds of those animals, however explicit
their behavior is, so, Chimpanzees, I'd say, really are
probably the only non-human species at present that we
could say probably are aware of death. In other
words, aware that death has occurred and that some
profound. CHANGE has occurred in what was once living,
animate, a, an individual if you like, um, and
is no longer. And until recently, I'd have been
happy with the notion that that's because they have
a a theory of mind. And they were thinking,
hang on, Ricardo is no longer, you know, moving,
he must have passed on, he must be dead.
But I think primatologists are now questioning whether we
really can say that chimpanzees have a theory of
mind in that sense. Certainly are are aware of
their own selves, so I think they'd certainly be
aware I am Paul if you like, you know,
and that I may not call Ricardo, but he's
not Paul, you know, and now not Paul has
stopped existing. Um, BUT beyond that, it really is
remarkably different. Hypothetically, chimpanzees could have a wonderful set
of beliefs about the afterlife and think, ah, Ricardo
has gone on to the Mongongo nut forest in
the in the afterlife and he's happy now. How
do we know? I mean, of course we tend
to think, what would be the use of that
in a chimpanzee brain, you know, but it's impossible
to distinguish. But in monkeys we can see. Similar
activities to chimpanzees, so if you like a slightly
lower grade of primates we can see are aware
that something is happening or has happened but probably
doesn't translate to, you know, the actual belief that
this is death. In modern humans, um, the understanding
of death can come about at a relatively early
age. You know, um, the understanding of what death
is and that it entails cessation of biological function
comes out from the age of 4 or 5,
depending on where you are. If you live in
a rural society. You know, with a more um
explicit experience of death than say somebody like me
in a modern city where deaths occur at a
hospital and you know, at a distance, that understanding
comes out later. So over the course of human
evolution. And obviously animal evolution, we can assume that
there was an early emergence of an understanding that
death has occurred and, you know, is represented by
the heart stopping beating and this sort of thing.
But beyond that, in terms of beliefs, we really
can't get at it ethologically by watching. Non-communicative, non-speaking
er animals if you like, and even in the
archaeological record, in my opinion, it's only with Homo
sapiens societies in the Ice Age, Upper Paleolithic and
late Stone Age groups that we can see the
behaviors associated with disposing of the dead er seem
to er, Be obeying some kind of belief, some
kind of grammar if you like, about how things
should be done, and only from that can we
start inferring that there is a belief system underpinning
these, ah, this person's now dead, this is what
we have to do. Whether or not that comes
from beliefs about a spiritual world and so on,
you know, is a more debatable point, but I
think that by about 30,000 years ago, the middle
part of the Upper Paleolithic in Europe, say, we
have enough indications that only certain, Dead individuals are
buried, very different to what we think of in
the modern world, and that these behaviors, the burial
and so on, seem to be associated with wider
behaviors that seem to have some kind of ritual
relevance. So I think from that point we can
assume that there are belief systems in place and
those belief systems probably, uh, include a supernatural one,
spirits, uh, and this kind of thing. And that
at that point the burials if you like are
ways to deal with odd deaths in this case,
they're not, they're not a universal thing, just for
odd periods. So in an odd way, in my
opinion, what we think of as a very natural
thing to bury the dead, to cremate the dead
and disperse their remains originates not in, You know,
love and belief and commemoration, but in very odd
circumstances and trying to mitigate the possible ramifications of
those.
Uh, OK, but, but, uh, do you think that
it is, or it would be plausi scientifically plausible
for people to claim that at least some other
non, uh, human animal species are aware of death
even if it doesn't include, uh, I don't know,
transcendental spiritual stuff and other more symbolic things like
that.
Yeah, I, I think certainly in terms of human
evolution, us archaeologists tend to underestimate. Uh, THE cognitive
achievements, the cognitive levels of pre-modern humans, so we,
we're always being surprised when we find that such
and such, oh, Neanderthals did a bit of art,
you know, wow, and this kind of thing, and
from my understanding of ethology, uh, I'm sure we
can say the same thing about animals. So yes,
hypothetically, of course, I think certainly when we're dealing
with large brained mammals, you know, mammals. Who are
maintaining metabolically paying for brains a little larger than
one might expect just to power their bodies if
you like, um, then it's entirely plausible of course
that they are aware of death. It is after
all, um, alongside reproduction, the most profoundly encountered universal.
It's ubiquitous everywhere, everybody lives, eats, reproduces and dies,
so I think it would be, um, odd to
think that there wasn't some kind of cognitive way
that at least higher mammals could er engage with
this. So I think I have no problem um
that. Many animals, certainly primates, would understand something different
has happened, and they no longer need to feed.
Ricardo the parrot or Paul the dolphin, you know,
because they're no longer gonna eat and they're not
gonna complain about it and this kind of thing.
Partially, um, we can see that the bond that
develops, particularly between a mother and their offspring, um,
takes a long time to sever. This is. Probably
why chimpanzees, monkeys, and even dolphins have been observed
carrying around their dead offspring. You know, we don't
need to infer much in that. There's just a
bond and, you know, they don't understand why this
thing is no longer moving and so on, and
it takes some time for them to. To say
goodbye if you like, you know, um, but it
could well be that there is a slightly more
complex belief system er about those as well.
Mhm. So I would like to ask you now
about Paleolithic cave art, but just before we get
into the topic or this specific topic, do we
know when symbolism first evolved in the human species?
Us archaeologists are terrible at our use of the
word symbolism, you know, you find er one scratched
mark on a piece of bone and say there's
a symbolic action going on there, you know, so
symbolism, um, obviously using something to refer to something
else, um, is something that we can certainly identify
er when we see pieces of art, say something's
being represented. We can assume that that's symbolic or
when we can hear people talking, the very things
we're doing now between you and I are symbolic,
everything we do and say, um, but of course,
uh, it's quite difficult to identify in a very
specific way. In the artistic record, in the in
the Paleolithic er record, what we need to do
is understand that there are different levels of symbolism,
you know, that what I'm talking to you about
and what you're asking me are are at the
top end er of symbolism. At the other end
could be, you know, the simple ones, me painting
my face red cos I think it makes me
look more impressive than, you know, it might be
symbolism, um, or me wearing a football top, you
know, a red top for Liverpool Football Club. You
know, um, fine, you can interpret a message from
it, but it's hardly a sophisticated message. It's hardly
the words of Shakespeare or anything like that. So,
you know, when we find a scratch on a
bone or a repeated set of marks on a
bone. Sure it may be symbolic, but it may
not be symbolic in the sense of, you know,
reflecting the first few bars of a Brahms concerto
or whatever, it could be very, very simple. Now
with that caution er in mind. From about half
a million years ago, so for very archaic members
of the Homo genus, we have unique items, one
here, one there, of that kind of thing. We
have a shell, a marine shell from Trinil in
Java made by Homo erectus that has a zigzag
design simply engraved on it. It's unique, it may
be symbolism, we can hardly say it's sophisticated. And
we have a few other examples like that, so
say from 300,000 years ago, one in Israel, one
in Morocco, we have natural cobbles of stone, which
just vaguely resemble in their natural form a human
body. And some individual has modified by scraping er
part of that natural cobble just to bring out
that resemblance to the human body a little bit
more. Again, um, this is some, it's presumably saying
you look like a human or I think you
look like a human or hello, I'm human, but
that's possibly it and they're hardly common, these now.
Herein I think is where symbolism as we know
it has its very early origins. Of course we
can say that a chimpanzee's call, a play face,
you know, um, is symbolic, it's saying I wanna
play, I'm in a good mood, you know, and
so this kind of thing is probably where what
ultimately will become the wonderful symbolism we know. Originates,
er I think these individual examples, the Shell in
Java, the, The humanlike figures er elsewhere er are
just individuals. They, they come out of habits, the
way some people like to talk to themselves or
hum to themselves or are always singing or tapping
their fingers on their desks and this sort of
thing, and occasionally it winds up in a tangible
piece of graffiti, if you like. And that's important
I think because out of those habits at some
point people are gonna recognize this. So for example,
I'm sitting here talking to you and as I'm
sure you've noticed, I'm constantly moving my hands and
the way I move my hands tends to synchronize.
With my vowels and you know this kind of
thing, and then you start doing it, you notice
it and whether deliberately or not, when you're asking
me questions, you start Ricardo doing this, and now
we've got some kind of agreement going on, you
know, and whether we build on it deliberately or
not. We have the shared origins of something very
simply symbolic. It may well be that the next
time we talk, I'm wearing that red football top
and you think, oh, I kind of like that,
I'll start wearing a red top when I'm talking
to Paul, you know, and we've got a visual
system, and we can see what I call concurrence
like this from 100,000 years ago. And this is
interesting. Because we can see evidence for this, a
shared visual culture emerging in Homo sapiens in Africa
and in the Neanderthals er in the north, in
in er in Western Eurasia, and this is the
use of pigments. In Blombos Cave in South Africa
from 100,000 years ago, we can see that red
ochre lumps were being used to make a powder,
to make a red pigment, but also repeated designs
were being engraved on these. So clearly there was
a little vocabulary, if you like, of signs that
were being used. And with Neanderthals, broadly contemporary er
in in er Western Europe, Central Europe, we can
see that. They were using pigments to express parts
of their bodies on cave walls. They only survive
in deep caves, of course, so they may well
have been doing it on their own bodies and
elsewhere, but we can see them making hand stencils
by spitting. Pigment around a hand placed on a
surface, we can see them rubbing red ochre into
surfaces, we can see them covering their fingertips with
pigment and pressing them onto surfaces to to make
a shape. This is quite interesting er because it
seems to me that the earliest symbolic activity in
this sense is actually extending the body to the
natural landscape, leaving a sign of it in no
different a way as writing a graffiti, Ricardo. Here,
you know, for whatever reason er they're doing it,
and this is presumably recognized in a simple way,
there's a hand, whether or not it's that's Paul's
hand or that's Ricardo's hand, it's still recognized as
a symbol, perhaps for a human er or whatever.
And we seem to have a very long period.
Of this non-figurative art stemming from the body, the
social body, um, among Neanderthals, among early Homo sapiens,
and it's only after the Neanderthals have disappeared, And
in Europe really only we see the earliest evidence,
and in the other extreme of Eurasia, in Indonesia
and probably on uh on Australia, Tasmania, New Guinea,
although it's more difficult to date out there, it's
only in this period from 50,000 to 40,000 years
ago that figurative art emerges and we're on far
more secure ground when we're talking about symbolism. And
that's when people are depicting typically animals, prey animals
that they are crucially dependent upon for survival. That
becomes a very different thing, and I think this
is the point at which we are dealing with
quite a sophisticated symbolic system deriving from beliefs about
these animals and so on. So prior to that
I think it's more like social dynamics that are
being symbolized, so they're more akin to that football
fan's shirt, you know, than they are about the
words of Shakespeare or something like that.
Yeah, so, uh, but when it comes to cave
art specifically, of course, people in general tend to
be very fascinated by cave art, but, uh, when
it comes to a more scientific approach to it
and, uh, uh, thinking about fields like cognitive archaeology,
I mean, what is it about Human cognition that
we can infer from studying cave art. I mean,
are there specific aspects of, uh, the cognition of
the people who produce that kind of art that
we can say, OK, so this, uh, uh, for
sure this would have been a part of their
cognition. I mean. What, what, what can, what can
we tell exactly?
Yes, certainly. So, uh, I think we can make
two, well, we can make inferences in two broad
ways. First, the, the subject matter of figurative art,
well, of non-figurative but particularly figurative art, uh, and
secondly on the, the visual psychological. Processes that seem
to have been behind er some of the earliest
art. I mean in terms of what is depicted,
of course, the earliest art, cave art, rock art
in general is overwhelmingly dominated by the depiction of
animals and only very rarely by the depiction of
humans themselves. And this is not surprising. The art
was produced of course by hunter gatherers who are
dependent entirely on hunting and gathering wild resources, and
in northern latitudes such as Eurasia, most of the
available nutrients critical for survival are on the hoof.
You know, they are there in the landscape in
animal form, so inevitably. Hunting those animals becomes critically
important, so perhaps it's no surprise that in many
respects, rock art is a great celebration of these
critically important prey animals in, you know, in the
Western European Paleolithic, um, bison. The extinct cattle or
rocks and deer, red deer, reindeer, horse, and to
a lesser extent ibex mammoth and other er other
animals. So that tells us a lot of course
about the mindset er of our ice age er
hunter gatherers and presumably reflects, um, some kind of
celebration about these animals. Now if we look at
the anthropology of hunting. Gatherers over the last 2
or 3 centuries, we can see they tend to
to um, share the same characteristic belief systems. They
believe that they are they are part of the
whole that is the world, the cosmos, um, you
know, and in fact that there are no fixed
boundaries between different elements of that cosmos. In other
words, you can't say I am human. And there
is a boundary around me and that is a
reindeer, and there is a boundary around that, there
is a lot of blurring. And what this actually
means is when they kill an animal to consume
it, they're actually borrowing that animal from the wider
cosmological world and typically their rituals tend to revolve
around um placating the animal spirits, thanking them er
for this, and most notably ensuring that another animal
spirit will emerge in the world, you know, sort
of one in one out kind of er kind
of thing, um, so. We can certainly see from
a belief system, a lot of the rock art
as being involved, being part of ritual behaviors designed
to appease spirits, to bring, to ensure that everything
stays the same. We can see this in fury
beliefs, by the way, um, you know, the whole
thing with with ancient Egypt. WAS about preserving art,
the, the natural state of things at the point
the world was created. So, you know, everybody likes
to have these rituals, whether they be rock art
or funerary or whatever, uh, that keeps everything the
way it should be, uh, and so on. So
that, that gives us a key into, uh, to
this and maybe caves. Which are universally across the
world thought of as places where this world meets
the other world. Perhaps these are the places where
these animals are coming into existence and you know
what the human rituals are doing are helping them.
It's like midwifery, as we would say, they're like
being midwives helping the birth of these animals. But
equally we can see a number of other characteristics
involved which have a more hardcore scientific er basis
and one thing I I like doing is collaborating
with our professor of visual psychology at Durham, Bob
Kentridge, who er. Uh, AND we together use modern,
uh, visual psychological research methods to investigate cave art
and, and other aspects of Paleolithic art. One thing
us humans have in our wonderfully imaginative brains is
this process of paraolia. So if you imagine our
brains have obviously evolved as small primates originally on
a dangerous African savannah, and clearly they have evolved
a fairly hair trigger way to to keep us
out of danger. So in other words, as as
we're sitting here, if you or I see something
move out of the corner of our eyes. As
an Australopithecine, 3.5 ft tall, unarmed, and so on,
it makes far more sense for our brains just
to assume that's a leopard coming to kill us,
uh, as opposed to a rock or a tree.
So the brain shouts leopard, leopard, and you run
and you know, thankfully you're just embarrassed when you
do finally look around to see that it was
just a tree after all. That seems to be
what our brains do, it, you know, it doesn't
make sense to look around, is that a leopard
coming for me? Maybe it's just a tree, I'll
have a look, that's not gonna make sense. And
that's left us er an evolutionary legacy in the
fact that our brains are terrific at routinely and
automatically trying to make sense of totally random things.
It's why when we look up at the clouds,
we see a little poodle dog or we see,
we slice open a tomato and see the face
of the Virgin Mary, er in it or something,
that's our brains saying that's what it is and
probably ghosts, we can. Um, YOU know, spirits and
so on we can ascribe to Paidolia too, and
the relevance of this to the earliest figurative art
is that in caves and rock shelters in the
Paleolithic, we can see that lumps and bumps of
cave walls that vaguely resemble, say, the back of
a horse, the head of a bison or whatever,
have been recognized in the Paleolithic, and the images
have been created to incorporate. Those aspects, we can
test this scientifically, we can put eye tracking goggles
on people, we can get them looking around virtual
caves that we've actually put art in and so
on, and we can see where their eyes fall,
etc. AND we can see. Time and time again
that certain lumps and bumps will attract people of
diverse backgrounds and so on, you know, so clearly
the fact that our brains evolved to have this
ability to imagine and that our visual brains evolved
to to make a snappy decision using that imagination
has translated into the earliest figurative art, and it's
tempting. Difficult to prove but tempting to think that
of course, the fact that the brains are really
seeing a bison or a mammoth in that cave
wall, gives rise to the belief systems that that's
because the mammoth and the bison really are there.
In the cave wall and are trying to come
out again into the world. It's a rather nice
way to put, you know, the hard science of
visual psychology uh together with our, you know, uh
admittedly more speculative um ideas about belief systems.
OK, so, uh, look, I, I'm getting really mindful
of your time. Maybe, uh, I guess it would
be better for us to leave, uh, the, uh,
because I have another question about whether art is
an evolved adaptation, but I'm afraid that probably that
would take a while to address because it's a
very multifaceted question. So do you think we should
probably leave it for uh Another potential,
I think that's a great point to pick up
on and as you say we can probably do
a whole podcast session on that, but yeah, uh,
I think it probably is, uh, adaptive, but we'll
leave it at that and next time we'll chat,
I can explain to you why. Yeah,
of course, so, uh, would you like just to
tell people where they can find you and your
work on the internet?
Certainly, yeah, so um you can just email er
just Google search for Paul Pettit at at Durham
or Paul Pettit Durham, er you'll see I have
a website on Durham University's archaeology department, that's probably
the best uh place to find me.
Great, so Doctor Petit, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a very fascinating conversation and I'm looking forward
to our next one.
My pleasure, Ricardo, anytime and I look forward to
that too.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgius Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.